There are some movies about youth that just make you feel old, even if you aren’t. “Scott Pilgrim vs. the World,” based on a series of sprightly graphic novels by Bryan Lee O’Malley, has the opposite effect. Its speedy, funny, happy-sad spirit is so infectious that the movie makes you feel at home in its world even if the landscape is, at first glance, unfamiliar.

I don’t mean the streets of Toronto, where the movie is set, and which we have all seen on-screen before, usually pretending to be the streets of other cities. (“Wait, they make movies in Toronto?” says Scott Pilgrim, deadpanning one of a million quick little jokes threaded through the action.) The drab, mumbly realism with which the director Edgar Wright depicts that city is offset — subverted, enlivened, thrown into crazy do-it-yourself pop-art relief — by images and situations drawn from arcade video games.

These are part of Scott’s life in the usual way. He is a 22-year-old bass guitarist who plays the game Dance Dance Revolution on a date with one girlfriend and tries to impress both her and another would-be girlfriend with arcane lore about the origins of Pac-Man. But Scott, played by Michael Cera with even less macho swagger than he showed in “Juno” and “Superbad” (he has the voice of Gumby and the muscle tone to match), is also a video game character. His post-adolescent life — rehearsing with his band, mooning over some girls and avoiding others, hanging out with his roommate, moping and napping and avoiding work — is periodically disrupted by spectacular battles with mighty foes. Their powers and his are tallied up on-screen, and he must negotiate a complex system of points, levels and lives of a kind easily recognizable to any joystick jockey.

To say that “Scott Pilgrim vs. the World” is the best video game movie ever may sound like absurdly faint praise, though I have high hopes for “Tron: Legacy.” Most films that try to exploit the popularity of gaming mimic the look and mood of state-of-the-art first-person games, rather than the cruder, more cartoony ones evoked here. But Mr. Wright’s deeper ingenuity (and Mr. O’Malley’s) is to collapse the distance between gamer and avatar not by throwing the player into the world of the game, but rather by bringing it to him. (If you want to reverse this process there is now a Scott Pilgrim video game.) As a result, the line between fantasy and reality is not so much blurred as erased, because the filmmakers create an entirely coherent, perpetually surprising universe that builds on Mr. O’Malley’s bold and unpretentious graphic style without slavishly duplicating it.

But back to Scott, who lives in a basement room with Wallace (Kieran Culkin), a gay best friend who happily embodies the stereotype even as he smashes it to pieces. Wallace is one of several characters who observe and comment on Scott’s life while conducting their own dramas in the margins of his mock-epic struggle. Another is Scott’s sister, Stacey (Anna Kendrick), who offers him not-so-patient advice on his girl troubles, which seem to be legion. When the story begins, Scott is still bruised after being dumped, a year earlier, by Envy (Brie Larson), who has gone on to become a rock star, with a recording contract and posters of her looking fierce all over town.

In her absence, Scott pursues a chaste romance with a high-school student named Knives Chau (Ellen Wong), who thinks that he and his band, Sex Bob-omb, are the coolest things ever. In the case of the band, that’s almost true, since their frontman in a tormentedly unshaven Mark Webber, their drummer is an adorably scowly Alison Pill, and their caterwauling power-pop numbers were composed by Beck Hansen. So Scott may succeed in being cool by association, and he is happy enough to bask in Knives’s adoration until he meets Ramona Flowers (Mary Elizabeth Winstead), who is so cool she makes wintertime Toronto seem tropical.

With soft features, keen eyes and dyed hair that recall Kate Winslet in “Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind,” Ms. Winstead is both the film’s designated heartthrob and its brains. The pairing of an anxious, diffident loser with a woman who is miles out of his league is beyond a cliche at this point, and making the situation seem fresh is a task that falls on Ms. Winstead as much as on Mr. Cera. And somehow they make it work, in part because Ramona never lets go of her skepticism even as she warms to Scott, and in part because Scott is never the abject weakling he often wants everyone to believe he is. His quivery diffidence contains quite a bit of guile, and what we know of his romantic history suggests a wolf in wet noodle’s clothing. (At least one young woman, a truculent barista named Julie, played by Aubrey Plaza, has his number on this score).

Ramona’s romantic history, on the other hand, poses a mortal danger to Scott. One of her exes (it turns out to be Jason Schwartzman, amusingly cast as the designated older guy) has organized the others, going back to grade school, into a league, and Scott must do battle with each one in turn. The fights are as much like musical numbers as standard action sequences, and they give Mr. Wright the chance to expand the kinetic visual wit that made his earlier genre spoofs — “Shaun of the Dead” and “Hot Fuzz”— such crazy fun.

There is plenty of that in “Scott Pilgrim vs. the World” — fast cuts, off-kilter puns, sight gags and sound effects in such profusion that you may want to see it again as soon as its over. But underneath is a disarming sincerity and a remarkable willingness to acknowledge ambivalence, self-doubt, hurt feelings and all the other complications of youth. At the end, the movie comes home to the well-known territory of the coming-of-age story, with an account of lessons learned and conflicts resolved. But you’ll swear you’ve never seen anything like it before.
